---
layout: post
title:  "A Short Note on the Manifestation of God"
categories: [Philosophy]
author: Siddharth
image: assets/images/god_universe.jpg
permalink: god-manifestation
tags: [Advaita]
description: "Is God a sentient entity? Do our lives matter to God? A short investigation."
---
Sir Edwin Arnold has written in the beautiful poem <i>Light of Asia</i> that before Enlightenment, while witnessing the miseries of the world, Buddha kept asking the question:

<i>"How can it be that Brahma</i>

<i>Would make a world and keep it miserable,</i>

<i>Since if all-powerful, he leaves it so,</i>

<i>He is not good, and if not powerful,</i>

<i>He is not God?"</i>

At its heart, this beautiful quotation raises two questions. First, is God a sentient entity? Second, if the answer to the previous question is yes, then do our lives matter to God? 

Notably, I have skipped the question: does God exist? This omission is intentional. Based on what Science has taught us until this point in 2020, we do not know why the Universe originated in the first place and what exactly was the Singularity before the Big Bang happened (assuming that the Big Bang theory is indeed true). Since the Universe does exist, whether with or without a purpose, we can humbly accept that it was created by somebody and that we do not know the true nature of that somebody. This would mean that we cannot rule out the possibility of the existence of God. God does not have to exist in a human or living form. It (for I do not know God's gender) may just exist as an imperceivable entity beyond our comprehension. On the other hand, if we argue that the Universe is a simulation or it only exists in the figment of our collective imagination, then too, there has to be a force enabling this simulation or imagination, which for all practical purposes would be God to us (more on this below). Thus, it is safe to assume that there is some entity beyond our understanding that gave rise to the Universe, which we can label as God. Now, let us concentrate on the two questions we asked before.

Is God a sentient entity? The assumption that God has created the Universe makes it an all-powerful entity. With our limited human understanding of consciousness (constrained by our senses and the computational power of our brains and our creations), we can broadly distinguish God's sentience into three categories. First, God is non-sentient in the human definition of sentience, just like the myriad objects around us. This may mean that after creating the Universe, God ceased to exist as a sentient entity. It may mean that either God was separate from the physical entity that was the Universe before creation or that the "Singularity" itself was God which broke down and creation happened. It also follows from this that the Universe has no purpose and everything is being dictated by the blind probabilities of the interaction between atoms. If this is the case, all questions about the manifestation of God cease to exist.

Second, God is sentient in the human definition of being conscious. Most of the world religions believe in this conception of God. God is symbolized and idealized as a human entity (such as in a human-like physical form like in various schools of Hinduism, in the form of spirits as in animistic religions, or formless like in Islam, among others) which can feel, understand, and respond to our emotions (happiness, pain, pleasure, anger, fear, surprise, etc.). Ergo, it is taken as granted that God is interested in how our lives are going, would be willing to influence them, and may confer joys or punishments on us after we die. This conception of a humanlike sentient God is, of course, fictional in the sense that it is limited by how we sense, think, and act. Another mammal may evolve on our planet itself to wonder about the existence of the world in a totally different manner because its sense organs and brain structure could be completely different from ours. A side-note here is that God may be assumed to have a subhuman-consciousness (like that of a virus, bacteria, amoeba, or ant) but it is hard to visualize then that how it would influence entities much more complex than itself. 

Third, God is a supersentient entity. To our ancestors living for millennia in the wild, radiations like Radiowave, Ultraviolet, Microwave, etc. were non-existent. This is because humans do not have the sense organs to perceive them. This is unlike bats that use ultrasound waves to detect their prey. Now bats and humans are both limited in their perception abilities when compared to many snakes that use infrared imaging for prey detection. I am illustrating these examples to highlight the fundamental fact that all our thoughts and actions are limited by our understanding of the world through our senses. How we perceive the Universe would most-likely not be how its Creator would perceive the Universe since it had all the tools at its disposal when it created one. God, as this supersentient entity, would be beyond our wildest dreams, fascinations, and imaginations since it is utterly, truly, mindbogglingly impossible and hopeless for us to understand any aspect of that supersentient entity.

This brings us to the second question: do our lives matter to God? To investigate this question, let us first become familiar with the Kardashev scale. Our ability to advance our civilization is strictly proportional to the amount of energy we can harness. On Earth, the energy we harness comes from the Sun and the natural resources present on the planet. All our food, whether you are vegan, vegetarian, non-vegetarian, or anything else, ultimately comes from the Sun's energy since it is sunlight that is used by plants for photosynthesis. In 1964, Soviet astronomer Nikolai Kardashev proposed the Kardashev scale which characterizes civilizations based on how much energy they could harness. A Type 0 civilization is like that of a colony of a bacteria which harnesses a negligible amount of energy from its environment whereas a Type 1 civilization can harness the full energy of its source planet. Some astronomers postulate that presently we are at about 0.75 on this scale.

Now, the Kardashev scale goes on to define Type 2, 3, 4, and Omega civilizations which can harness the energy of its star, multiple stars in a galaxy, multiple galaxies, and the whole universe, respectively. The difference between each of these types of civilizations is the same as between us and God. For example, to a bacteria living in a Type 0 civilization, human beings at Type 0.75 civilization may well be Gods because of the extent of our abilities to shape our surroundings when compared to that bacteria. Similarly, it is inconceivable for us to imagine what creatures living in Type 2 or 3 civilization could do since they may already have the computational power and resources to simulate a mini-Universe of their own. This is why many philosophers postulate if we are living in a simulation. However, we have not yet observed any signs of Type 2 or higher civilization in the Universe that we have observed until now.

Coming back to our second question. Does the life of a bacteria currently sitting somewhere on the edge of the fingernail of your right hand's little finger matter to you? Would you be interested in knowing about when it was born, at what instant did it undergo binary fission to reproduce, how much energy is stored inside it now for its survival in the next one second, will that bacteria survive being surrounded by bacteria of a different kind competing for the same source of food? These questions are as meaningless to us as they may be to a highly advanced civilization who is simulating us or the God who has created us. This sounds about right unless we are being simulated by an advanced civilization for some reason beyond our understanding or with a sense of nostalgia since that civilization was like us at some point in history. If this is true, then our lives and our Universe may or may not have a purpose, depending on the wishes of that advanced civilization whose simulation we are. But, then this idea would again give rise to the question: who created that advanced civilization in the first place i.e. who is the ultimate God?

Yes, this is all a very depressing thought. What follows from the above discussion is that most-likely either God is not sentient in the human definition of sentience or that God is supersentient and would most likely have no interest in our "fascinating" lives or "fanciful" afterlives. But, since we can humbly accept now that we cannot understand the true manifestation of God, as a last resort in our quest of understanding God's likely manifestation, we can afford to take a few liberties. It may be that as many religions suggest, we don't need to search for God around us but within is. It may well be that this all-powerful non-sentient/supersentient entity is present within each one of us, within every object surrounding us, within every atom existing in the Universe. That is perhaps why the realization of <i>"Aham Brahma Asmi"</i> may well be a worthwhile aim for a human being.
